This is the LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain. For more
information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
Anne of Green Gables by Lucy Mon Montgomery. Chapter 28. An Unfortunate Lily Maid.
Of course you must be Elaine Anne, said Diana. I could never have the courage to float down there.
Nor I, said Ruby Gillis with a shiver. I don't mind floating down when there's two or three of us in
the flat and we can sit up. It's fun then. But to lie down and pretend I was dead? I just couldn't.
I'd really die of fright. Of course it would be romantic, conceded Jane Andrews, but I know that
I couldn't keep still. I'd be popping up every minute or so to see where I was and if I wasn't
drifting too far out. And you know Anne, that would spoil the effect. But it's so ridiculous
to have a redheaded Elaine, mourned Anne. I'm not afraid to float down and I'd love to be Elaine,
but it's ridiculous just the same. Ruby ought to be Elaine because she is so fair and has such
lovely long golden hair. Elaine had all her bright hair streaming down, you know. And Elaine was a
haired person, cannot be a lilymaid. Your complexion is just as fair as Ruby's, said Diana
earnestly, and your hair is ever so much darker than it used to be before you cut it. Oh, do you
really think so? exclaimed Anne, flushing sensitively with delight. I've sometimes thought it was myself,
but I never dared to ask anyone, for fear she would tell me it wasn't. Do you think it could
be called Auburn now, Diana? Yes, and I think it is real pretty, said Diana, looking admirably
at the short silky curls that clustered over Anne's head and were held in place by a very jaunty
black velvet ribbon and bow. They were sitting on the bank of the pond below Orchard Slope,
where a little headland fringed with birches ran out from the bank. At its tip was a small wooden
platform built out into the water for the convenience of fishermen and duck hunters.
Ruby and Jane were spending the mid-summer afternoon with Diana, and Anne had come over
to play with them. Anne and Diana had spent most of their play time that summer on and about the
pond. Idlewild was a thing of the past, Mr. Bell having ruthlessly cut down the little circle of
his back pasture in the spring. Anne had sat among the stumps and wept, not without an eye
for the romance of it, but she was speedily consoled for, after all, as she and Diana,
big girls of thirteen going on fourteen, were too old for such childish amusements as playhouses,
and there were more fascinating sports to be found about the pond. It was splendid to fish
for trout over the bridge, and the two girls learned to row themselves about in the little
bottom dory Mr. Berry kept for duck shooting. It was Anne's idea that they dramatize a lane.
They had studied Tennyson's poems in school the preceding winter, the superintendent of
education having prescribed it in the English course for the Prince Edward Island schools.
They had analyzed and parsed it and torn it to pieces in general, until it was a wonder there
was any meaning at all left in it for them. But at least the fair lily maid and Lancelot and
King Arthur had become very real people to them, and Anne was devoured by secret regret
that she had not been born in Camelot. Those days, she said, were so much more romantic than the
present. Anne's plan was hailed with enthusiasm. The girls had discovered that if the flat were
pushed off from the landing place, it would drift down with the current under the bridge
and finally strand itself in another headland lower down which ran a curve of the pond.
They had often gone down like this, and nothing could be more convenient for playing Elaine.
Well, I'll be Elaine, said Anne, yielding reluctantly, for although she would have been
delighted to play the principal character, yet her artistic sense demanded fitness for it,
and thus she felt her limitations made impossible. Ruby, you must be King Arthur, and Jane will be
We can't have the old dumb servitor because there isn't room for two in the flat when one
is lying down. We must pawl the barge all its length in the blackest semi.
That old black shell of your mother's will do, just the thing, Diana.
The black shell having been procured, Anne sped it over the flat and then lay down on the bottom
with closed eyes and hands folded over her breast.
Oh, she really does look dead, whispered Ruby Gillis nervously, watching the still white little
face under the flickering shadows of the birches. It makes me feel frightened, girls. Do you suppose
it's really right to act like this? Mrs. Lynde says that all play acting is abominably wicked.
Ruby, you shouldn't talk about Mrs. Lynde, said Anne severely. It spoils the effect because this
hundreds of years before Mrs. Lynde was born. Jane, you arrange this. It's silly for Elaine
to be talking when she's dead. Jane rose to the occasion. Cloths of gold for coverlet, there was
none, but an old piano scarf of yellow Japanese crepe was an excellent substitute. A white lily
was not obtainable just then, but the effect of a tall blue iris placed in one of Anne's folded hands
was all that could be desired. Now she's all ready, said Jane. We must kiss her quiet brows.
And Diana, you say, Sister, farewell forever. And Ruby, you say, Farewell, sweet sister.
Both of you as sorrowfully as you possibly can. And for goodness sake, smile a little. You know,
Elaine, lay as though she smiled. That's better. Now push the flat off.
The flat was accordingly pushed off, scraping roughly over an old embedded stake in the process.
Diana and Jane and Ruby only waited long enough to see it caught in the current and headed for the
bridge before scampering up through the woods, across the road, and down to the lower headland
where, as L'Antillante and Guinevere and the King, they were to be in readiness to receive the lily
and Jane. For a few minutes, Anne, drifting slowly down, enjoyed the romance of her situation in
full. Then something happened not at all romantic. The flat began to leak. In a very few moments,
it was necessary for Elaine to scramble to her feet, pick up her cloth of gold coverlet
and pall of the blackest semite, and glaze blankly at the big crack in the bottom of her barge,
through which the water was literally pouring.
That sharp shake at the landing had torn off the strip of batting nailed on the flat. Anne did not
know this, but it did not take her long to realize that she was in a dangerous plight.
At this rate, the flat would fill and sink long before it could drift to the lower headland.
Where were the oars? Left behind at the landing.
Anne gave one gasping little scream, which nobody ever heard. She was white to the lips,
but she did not lose her self-possession. There was one chance, just one.
I was horribly frightened, she told Mrs. Allen the next day. And it seemed like years while the
flat was drifting down to the bridge and the water was rising at every moment. I prayed, Mrs. Allen,
most earnestly, but I didn't shut my eyes to pray, for I knew the only way God could save me was to
let the flat float close enough to one of the bridge piles for me to climb up on it.
You know, the piles are just old tree trunks and there are lots of knots and old branch dubs on
them. It was proper to pray, but I had to do my part by watching out and right while I knew it.
I just said, Dear God, please take the flat close to the pile and I'll do the rest,
over and over again. Under such circumstances, you don't think much about making a flowery prayer,
but mine was answered, for the flat bumped right into the pile for a minute and I flung the scarf
and the shawl over my shoulder and scrambled up on a big providential stub. And there I was,
Mrs. Allen, clinging to that slippery old pile with no way of getting up or down.
It was a very unromantic position, but I didn't think about it at the time.
You don't think much about romance when you have just escaped from a watery grave.
I said a grateful prayer at once and then I gave all my attention to holding on tight,
for I knew I should probably have to depend on human aid to get back to dry land.
The flat drifted under the bridge and then promptly sank in midstream.
Ruby, Jane, and Diana, already awaiting it on the lower headland, saw it disappear before their very
eyes and had no doubt but that Anne had gone down with it. For the moment they stood still,
white as sheets, frozen with a horror at the tragedy. Then, shrieking at the top of their
voices, they started on a frantic run up through the woods, never pausing as they crossed the main
road to glance the way of the bridge. Anne, clinging desperately to her precarious foothold,
saw their flying forms and heard their shrieks. Help would soon come, but meanwhile her position
was a very uncomfortable one. The minutes passed by, a seeming like an hour to the unfortunate
Lily made. Why didn't somebody come? Where had the girls gone? Suppose they had fainted,
one and all. Suppose nobody ever came. Suppose she grew so tired and cramped that she could
hold on no longer. Anne looked at the wicked green depths below her, wavering with long oily
shadows and shivered. Her imagination began to suggest all manner of gruesome possibilities to
her. Then, just as she thought she could really not endure the ache in her arms and wrists another
moment, Gilbert Blythe came rowing under the bridge and harming Andrew's dory. Gilbert glanced
up and, much to his amazement, beheld a little white scornful face looking down on him with big,
frightened but also scornful gray eyes. Anne, surely, how on earth did you get up there?
he exclaimed. Without waiting for an answer, he pulled close to the pile and extended his hand.
There was no help for it. Anne, clinging to Gilbert Blythe's hand, scrambled down into the
dory where she sat, drabbled and furious, in the stern with her arms full of draping shawl
and wet crepe. It was certainly extremely difficult to be dignified under the circumstances.
What has happened, Anne? asked Gilbert, taking up his oars.
We were playing Elaine, explained Anne frantically without even looking at her
rescue. And I had to drift down to Camelot and the barge, I mean the flat. The flat began to
leak and I climbed onto the pile. The girls went for help. Would you be kind enough to row me to
the landing? Gilbert obligingly rowed to the landing and Anne, disdaining assistance, sprang
nimbly on the shore. I'm very much obliged to you, she said haughtily as she turned away.
But Gilbert also sprung from the boat and gnawed a detaining hand on her arm.
Anne, he said hurriedly, look here. Can't we be good friends? I'm awfully sorry I made fun of your
hair that time. I didn't mean to vex you and I only meant it for a joke. Besides, it's so long ago.
I think your hair is awful pretty now. Honest I do. Let's be friends.
For a moment Anne hesitated. She had an odd, newly awakened consciousness
under all her outraged dignity that the half shy, half eager expression in Gilbert's hazel eyes
was something that was very good to see. Her heart gave a quick, queer little beat.
But the bitterness of her old grievance promptly stiffened up her wavering determination.
That scene of two years before flushed back into her recollection as vividly as if it had taken
place yesterday. Gilbert had called her carrots and had brought about her disgrace before the whole
school. Her resentment, which to other and older people might be as laughable as its cause,
was a no wit allayed and softened by time seemingly. She hated Gilbert Blythe. She would
never forgive him. No, she said coldly, I shall never be friends with you Gilbert Blythe and I
don't want to be. All right, Gilbert sprang into his skiff with angry colour in his cheeks.
I'll never ask you to be friends again Anne Shirley and I don't care either.
He pulled away with swift, defiant strokes and Anne went up to the steep,
forny little path under the maples. She held her head very high but she was conscious of an odd
feeling of regret. She almost wished she had answered Gilbert differently. Of course,
he had insulted her terribly but still. Altogether Anne rather thought it would be quite a relief
to sit down and have a good cry. She was really quite unstrung for the reaction from her fright
and cramped clinging was making itself felt. Halfway up the path she met Jane and Diana rushing back
the pond and the state narrowly removed from the positive friendly. They had found nobody at
Orchard Slope, both Mr. and Mrs. Berry being away. He and Ruby Gillis had succumbed to hysterics
and was left to recover from them as best she might. While Jane and Diana flew through the
haunted wood and across the brook to Green Gables. There they had found nobody either
for Marilla had gone back to Carmody and Matthew was making hay in the back field.
Oh Anne, gasped Diana, fairly falling on the former's neck and weeping with relief and
delight. Oh Anne, we thought you were drowned and we felt like murderers because we had made you
made you be Elaine and Ruby's in hysterics. Oh Anne, how did you escape?
I climbed up on one of the piles, explained Anne wearily and Gilbert Blythe came along
Andrew's story and brought me to land. Oh Anne, how splendid of him. Why it's so romantic said
Jane finding breath enough for this utterance at last. Of course she'll speak to him after this.
Of course I won't flashed Anne with a momentary return of her old spirit and I don't want to ever
hear the word romantic again Jane Andrews. I'm awfully sorry you're so frightened girls.
It is all my fault. I feel I'm sure I was born under an unlucky star. Everything I do gets me
or my dearest friends into escape. We've gone and lost your father's flat Diana and I have a
presentiment that will not be allowed to row in the pond anymore. Anne's presentiment proved more
trustworthy than presentiments are apt to do. Great was the consternation in the Barry and Cuthbert
households when the events of the afternoon became known. Will you ever have any sense Anne
grown Marilla? Oh yes I think I will Marilla returned Anne optimistically. A good cry indulged
in the grateful solitude of the East Gable had soothed her nerves and restored her to her wilted
cheerfulness. I think my prospects are becoming sensible are brighter than ever now. I don't say
said Marilla. Well explained Anne I've learned a new and viable lesson today.
Ever since I came to Green Gables I've been making mistakes and each mistake has helped to cure me of
some great shortcoming. The affair of the amethyst brooch cured me of meddling with things that
didn't belong to me. The haunted wood mistake cured me of letting my imagination run away with me.
The liniment mistake cured me of carelessness and cooking. Dying my hair cured me of vanity.
I never think about my hair and nose now at least very seldom and today's mistake is going to cure
me of being too romantic. I have come to the conclusion that it is no use trying to be romantic
and avidly. It was probably easy enough in towered Camelot of hundreds of years ago but romance is
appreciated now. I feel quite sure that you will soon see a great improvement in me in this respect
Marilla. I surely hope so said Marilla skeptically but Matthew who had been seated mutely in the
corner laid a hand on Anne's shoulder when Marilla had gone out. Don't give up all your romance Anne
he whispered shyly. A little of it is a good thing not too much of course but keep a little
of it Anne. Keep a little of it. End of chapter 28 recorded by Susan Hooks Tokyo Japan